hmmgcc -- Hidden Markov Model GC Content

This directory contains all the files necessary to perform HMM-based searches
for regions of different GC content in a (relatively small) genome.  This
distribution should compile cleanly on all UNIX distributions; simply type 
"make" in this directory to do so.  If you wish to use gcc explicitly, add 
optimization flags, change the directory "make install" installs to, or add 
other compiler options, simply edit the Makefile.  

The program is invoked with the command "hmmgcc".  The usage statement which is
printed when no parameters are provided is given below:

USAGE: hmmgcc [ -l length ] [ -v | -p cutoff | -P range-file | -a ] seq-file \
hmm-file
        -v      Viterbi mode -- print Viterbi state sequence (DEFAULT)
        -p      Posterior cutoff mode -- uses provided cutoff (ln P)
        -P      Posterior "greedy" mode -- uses highest possible cutoff to
                include all areas specified in the range file
        -a      Posterior "print all" mode -- prints decoding for all nts
        -l      All members of state looking for must be at least l long

The seq-file and hmm-file parameters are required.  seq-file is the 
filename for a DNA sequence (or sequences) in FASTA format.  hmm-file is the 
hidden Markov model file (see below).

The program has four decoding modes, as follows:

Viterbi mode is invoked by default, or can be explicitly called with the -v 
parameter.  In this mode, Viterbi decoding is performed, and the program prints
to standard output every region called as being produced by the high GC state. 

Posterior cutoff mode is invoked with the -p parameter, followed by a cutoff.
In this mode, posterior decoding is performed to identify the probability that 
each nucleotide was produced by the high GC state.  Only those nucleotides for 
which the natural logarithm of this probability is greater than the cutoff 
specified on the command line are reported as being GC-rich.  Specifically, the
program reports ranges of consecutive nucleotides for which ln P > cutoff.

Posterior "greedy" mode is invoked with the -P parameter, followed by a 
filename.  This mode also utilizes posterior decoding.  The file specified 
contains a list of ranges in the following format:
name	start-stop
where name is the name of the sequence from the fasta file, and start and stop 
are the start and stop positions of a region that you want to guarantee is 
called as being GC-rich.  The program reads in this list, and finds the highest
probability P such that the probability of being produced by the GC-rich state
for each nucleotide listed in the list of ranges is greater than or equal 
to P.  This probability P is then taken as the cutoff probability, and results 
are reported as for the standard posterior decoding mode.

Posterior "print all" mode is invoked with the -a parameter.  This mode simply 
reports every nucleotide and the log-probability (natural logarithm) that it 
was produced by the GC-rich state.

Finally, the -l option can be used with any mode but the "Posterior 'print 
all'" mode.  This option is followed by an integer.  When used, only those 
regions whose length is greater than or equal to the integer specified are 
reported.  This is useful in eliminating spurious, short GC-rich regions that 
probably are too short to be noncoding RNAs.

This directory also contains sample HMM files (ending in .hmm) and range files
(for the Posterior "greedy" mode) (ending in .range).  If you wish to modify 
the hmm parameters for your own use, simply copy an HMM file and change the 
numbers as the comments on each line tells you.  Note that each line must 
begin with either a # or a number.

To replicate the searches done in the paper, first download the appropriate 
Methanococcus or Pyrococcus genome.  The Viterbi decoding can be performed as 
follows:

hmmgcc -l 50 <genome file> <hmm file>

where the following hmm files may be used:
	example.hmm		Commented example file, should you wish
				to design your own HMM
	mj.hmm			Methanococcus jannaschii
	pf.hmm			Pyrococcus furiosus
	pa.hmm			Pyrococcus abyssi
	ph.hmm			Pyrococcus horikoshii

The searches of the Pyrococcus genomes with posterior decoding and a cutoff 
that guarantees all tRNAs are found can be performed using:

hmmgcc -l 50 -P px.range <genome file> px.hmm

where x is either f, a, or h depending on which Pyrococcus genome is being 
searched.  If you are going to use this approach, I recommend double-checking 
that you have the same version of the genome that we used; otherwise, the 
.range file provided may list nucleotides not in the tRNA genes (or be missing 
nucleotides from the tRNA genes), which will change the results.  Also 
double-check that the sequence name in the fasta file matches that in the 
.range file.


